Appext/template generator docs (#10000)
mendix/docs: content/en/docs/apidocs-mxsdk/apidocs/studio-pro-11/extensibility-api/web/web-extensions-howtos/command-api.md

---
title: "Register a Command Using Web API"
linktitle: "Register Commands"
url: /apidocs-mxsdk/apidocs/web-extensibility-api-11/command-api/
---

## Introduction

This how-to describes how to register a command in Studio Pro from an extension. This command can then be attached to a menu or context menus for a document or an editor.

## Prerequisites

This how-to uses the results of [Get Started with the Web Extensibility API](/apidocs-mxsdk/apidocs/web-extensibility-api-11/getting-started/). Please complete that how-to before starting this one. You should also be familiar with creating menus as described in [Create a Menu Using Web API](/apidocs-mxsdk/apidocs/web-extensibility-api-11/menu-api/).

## Register Commands

> With the Commands api, it is possible to register a command that can be executed when a menu is clicked, or a document (Home Page, Microflows in the App Explorer, etc), or inside an editor (i.e. Entities, Annotations, etc). This can be done through the commands api's `registerCommand`.

Reviewer: @MarcellvanRooyen Can you clarify the wording here? "It is possible to register a command that can be executed when a menu is clicked, or a document (Home Page, Microflows in the App Explorer, etc), or inside an editor (i.e. Entities, Annotations, etc)." I understand that you can register a command that is executed when a menu is clicked. Does the command execute when a document is clicked too? And what exactly happens "inside an editor"? Does the command execute when an entity or annotation, etc. is clicked too? Or does this mean that this occurs when a menu is clicked INCLUDING menus that are inside documents and editors?

Author: Hi Quinn thanks nice catch. I discussed with the team and updated the wording to be much clearer

---
title: "Register a Command Using Web API"
linktitle: "Register Commands"
url: /apidocs-mxsdk/apidocs/web-extensibility-api-11/command-api/
---

## Introduction

This how-to describes how to register a command in Studio Pro from an extension. This command can then be attached to a menu or context menus for a document or an editor.

## Prerequisites

This how-to uses the results of [Get Started with the Web Extensibility API](/apidocs-mxsdk/apidocs/web-extensibility-api-11/getting-started/). Please complete that how-to before starting this one. You should also be familiar with creating menus as described in [Create a Menu Using Web API](/apidocs-mxsdk/apidocs/web-extensibility-api-11/menu-api/).

## Register Commands

The Commands api allows users to register a reusable command. These commands can be attached to menus and context menus. Currently two api's make use of this feature please check out:

[Documents API](/apidocs-mxsdk/apidocs/web-extensibility-api-11/)
[App Explorer API](/apidocs-mxsdk/apidocs/web-extensibility-api-11/app-explorer-api/)

> To create commands a user can call the commands api's `registerCommand`.

Reviewer 2: For consistency:
```suggestion
To register commands a user can call the commands api's `registerCommand`.
```

> In the sample code below, we register a command and then attach it to a menu, by setting the property `commandId` to the `Menu` object. It is important to note that, when using a command in a menu it is no longer necessary to listen to the `menuItemActivated` event. Now, with commands, you can simply register your action and set the command id on the menu itself.

Reviewer 2: "no longer"
When did this change. Perhaps better just to say
```suggestion
In the sample code below, we register a command and then attach it to a menu, by setting the property `commandId` to the `Menu` object.

{{% alert color="info" %}}
When using a command in a menu you do not need to listen to the `menuItemActivated` event, you can simply register your action and set the command id on the menu itself.
{{% /alert %}}
```

> Also note that the `registerCommand` requires a generic type for the command payload once executed. For standalone menus that have a command without payload, you can simply register it with `<void>`. When using `void` the generic type declaration can also be left out, i.e. `registerCommand<void>(commandId...)` becomes `registerCommand(commandId...)`.

Reviewer 2: If it is a note, make it an info note.

> For commands that require payload, you must make sure you register the command with the exact expected payload object type. See the [App Explorer API](/apidocs-mxsdk/apidocs/web-extensibility-api-11/app-explorer-api/) and [Documents API](/apidocs-mxsdk/apidocs/web-extensibility-api-11/documents-api/) documentations for clear examples.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For commands that require payload, you must make sure you register the command with the exact expected payload object type. See the [App Explorer API](/apidocs-mxsdk/apidocs/web-extensibility-api-11/app-explorer-api/) and [Documents API](/apidocs-mxsdk/apidocs/web-extensibility-api-11/documents-api/) documentation for clear examples.
```

```typescript
import { ComponentContext, IComponent, Menu, StudioProApi, getStudioProApi } from "@mendix/extensions-api";

const extensionId = "myextension";

export const component: IComponent = {
    async loaded(componentContext: ComponentContext) {
        const studioPro = getStudioProApi(componentContext);

        await this.createMenuWithCommand(studioPro);
    }

    async createMenuWithCommand(studioPro: StudioProApi) {
        const commandId = `${extensionId}.menu-command`;
        const menuId = `${commandId}.menu`;

        await studioPro.app.commands.registerCommand<void>(
            commandId,
            async () => await studioPro.ui.messageBoxes.show("info", `This menu executed a command with id '${commandId}'`)
        );

        await studioPro.ui.extensionsMenu.add({ caption: "Menu with command", menuId, commandId });
    }
}
```

> As mentioned, it is also possible to create a context menu that belongs to a document in the app explorer or a document editor, and that menu can have a registered command attached to it. To do so, we can use the `appExplorer` api, or the `documents` api. Please see their respective tutorials, [App Explorer API](/apidocs-mxsdk/apidocs/web-extensibility-api-11/app-explorer-api/) and [Documents API](/apidocs-mxsdk/apidocs/web-extensibility-api-11/documents-api/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is also possible to create a context menu that belongs to a document in the app explorer or a document editor, and that menu can have a registered command attached to it. To do so, use the `appExplorer` api, or the `documents` api. For more information, see their respective how-tos: [App Explorer API](/apidocs-mxsdk/apidocs/web-extensibility-api-11/app-explorer-api/) and [Documents API](/apidocs-mxsdk/apidocs/web-extensibility-api-11/documents-api/).
```

> The command registration for commands that interact with documents are slightly different. They require a payload of type `{ documentId: string }`, which the backend will return the menu gets clicked. The `documentId` is the id of the **exact** document that was interacted with by the menu.

Reviewer 2: Do we need to embolden "exact" - it might make it non-translateable in future?

Author: I think its standard markdown any translation code will probably need to remove the markdown tags anyway are you sure this will not make it translatable?

{{% alert color="info" %}}

> It is important to remember that the command must be registered before creating any menus that might be attached to it.

Reviewer 2: Putting it in a blue box makes it something that is important to remember.
```suggestion
The command must be registered before creating any menus that might be attached to it.
```
